---
layout: post
title:  Create
date:   2014-11-27 23:00:00
image: workspace.jpg
category: Life
blurb: Those Who Can, Do
---

One of our most under-utilized abilities as human beings is our ability to create. So many of us go through life living lavishly and eccentrically in an effort to be remembered, where the real power is right under our own noses. The best way to last beyond our time isn’t to rely on word of mouth. It’s to make something permanent.

There’s a rule in technology known as the [1% rule](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/1%25_rule_%28Internet_culture%29). In short, 1% of a community’s user base creates new content. I imagine this to be true even in the realms of “real” life. So many of us listen to music, purchase paintings, and read books, but very few take the time to participate in the creative endeavors.

I myself am guilty of this. The idea of becoming talented at art or writing or music seems overwhelming and unattainable—something that others with better talents and fortunes do, and I simply appreciate. It’s important to step back and remember that everyone started somewhere and that everyone was bad, sometime.

One of my biggest inspirations on this front is one of my old co-workers, [Nick Hamze](http://madeby.nickhamze.com/). His development of “swag”—posters, mugs, and more—is prolific to the point of being impressive.

Although it isn’t New Years yet, I’d like to make a resolution. I am going to select some physical medium, and work to become good at it. I don’t want to become a prodigy in the field—I want leave my mark beyond myself. I want to call myself a part of the creating 1%.