---
layout: post
title:  WordPress 2020
date:   2016-01-16 10:00:00
image: wp_logo.jpg
category: Tech
blurb: The Future Is Now
---

This is an exciting time for WordPress. The addition of the new [REST API](http://v2.wp-api.org/), coupled with the proliferation of client-side focused development techniques like [react](https://facebook.github.io/react/), [AngularJS](https://angularjs.org/), and [Backbone.js](http://backbonejs.org/), has opened the door to a new paradigm of application development that utilizes WordPress as an efficient application store coupled with an application-specific client.

# Calypso: Today’s View of the Future
Automattic’s release of [Calypso](https://developer.wordpress.com/calypso/) late in 2015 serves as a reference implementation of taylor-made WordPress interfaces built atop the WordPress REST API and validates the model. It provides an effective and user-friendly tool for managing content on multiple WordPress sites _simultaneously_. Content becomes the top-level of the information hierarchy, with the specific target site as an attribute—the opposite of the traditional WordPress multisite model.

Calypso is also interesting as an architectural reference. As a react-based platform, it is constructed as a composition of [several dozen reusable components](https://github.com/Automattic/wp-calypso/tree/master/client/components). I expect WordPress plugins to begin to take the form of node.js’ npm packages: compositions of smaller, discrete components that are reused across many different projects. This has significant implications in both the size and maintainability of plugins, as well as in the way WordPress-centric development agencies, like [10up](http://10up.com/), where I work as a Senior Web Strategist, manage their development processes.

# The New WordPress Application Stack
WordPress isn’t going anywhere. Instead, WordPress will become the silent “under the hood” technology that often goes unrealized, like Linux on embedded devices or Windows on digital restaurant menus and airport flight status boards. There’s great value in using a proven, familiar technology as the underpinnings of various new projects. It reduces the need to reinvent the wheel (and the time spent doing so), and provides a _convention-over-configuration_ foundation that simplifies new developer on-boarding.

A wide variety of tools will begin to replace traditional WordPress templates as the front-end technologies of choice. While React may just be a passing fad, front-end frameworks focusing upon reusable components will continue to gain popularity. Custom, application-specific front-ends will become the norm. WordPress will, of course, continue to ship with a default administrative interface, though this will focus less on being a one-size-fits-all, heavily customizable tool and will begin to shift towards a single, more common use-case. Alternative, domain-specific interfaces for e-commerce management, corporate sites, newspapers, and other common use-cases will become the norm.

# Looking Forward: WordPress as a Platform
We’ll see WordPress as the underpinnings of a new class of isometric and multiple-platform applications, leveraging new technologies like React and React Native, existing technologies like PhoneGap or native platform development, and, of course, new, yet-to-be-developed technologies. The benefit of a competent, well-designed, consistent, and extensible REST API is how easily it enables development against nearly any platform, application, or development stack.

The WordPress of 2020 couples its current class-leading customization and editorial experience with the power of domain-specific user experiences built atop open platforms and protocols.

## Unanswered Questions
There’s still a lot of work to be done in realizing this model. Perhaps most notably omitted is the notion of WordPress’ fantastic customization-oriented ecosystem. The development and behavior of plugins is significantly more complicated when coupled with the idea of open-ended front-ends composed of different application front-ends. Nevertheless, a pervasive front-end framework and development method will soon take hold, which will open the door for creation of a new model of WordPress extensibility.

I’m very excited when I look towards the future of WordPress. There’s a lot of unexplored terrain to cover, and building and discovering the new model for the platform that powers more than 25% of the web is an opportunity new to many. If it excites you as much as it excites me, I’d _love_ for you to join me at [10up](http://10up.com/), where we’re working to plan and build some of the WordPress-based projects that will serve as examples for years into the future. [We’re hiring!](http://10up.com/careers/)